distance-estimator.md, before:

---
title: 'DistanceEstimator: Estimate the distance between two nucleotide sequence fragments using paired-end reads'
author: Shaun D Jackman, Inanc Birol
header-includes:
  \DeclareMathOperator*{\argmax}{arg\,max}
  \DeclareMathOperator{\MLE}{MLE}
---

Abstract
================================================================================

Paired-end reads may be used to estimate the distance between two sequences. Comparing a statistic, such as the mean, of the sample population of fragment sizes to the global population of fragment sizes is a trivial but flawed estimator. The maximum likelihood estimator yields more accurate estimates.

Results
================================================================================

To estimate the distance between two sequences, we start by mapping paired-end reads to the two sequences, which are then ordered and oriented to agree with the orientation of the reads. We establish a coordinate system where $-l_1$ and $-1$ are the first and last base of the first sequence of length $l_1$, and $0$ and $l_2-1$ are the first and last base of the second sequence of length $l_2$.  An observed fragment size, $x_i$, is calculated for each pair by calculating the difference of the mapped position of the first sequenced base of each of the two reads. This observed fragment size differs from the actual fragment size by the size of the gap between the two sequences, $\theta_0$.

The final input is the distribution of fragment sizes of the library, which is derived empirically by mapping the reads to a reference sequence or sequences assembled *de novo* and determining the inferred fragment size distribution.

Estimator using the mean
------------------------------------------------------------

At first glance, this task appears to be rather simple, and a simple solution presents itself readily. A reasonable estimate, $\hat \theta_\text{mean}$, of the size of the gap is the difference between the mean of the population, $\mu$, and the mean of the sample, $\bar x$.

$$
\hat \theta_\text{mean} = \mu - \bar x
$$

Maximum likelihood estimator
------------------------------------------------------------

The estimate of the distance between the two sequences can be improved by using the probability distribution in its entirety rather than a summary statistic. Let the probability of observing a fragment of size $x$ selected at random from the population be $f_X(x)$, and the probability of observing a fragment of size $x$ that spans a gap of size $\theta$ be $f_\theta(x)$. With a sample of $n$ observed fragment sizes, $x_1, \dotsc , x_n$, the likelihood that the two sequences are separated by a distance of $\theta$ bases is $\mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc , x_n)$.

The most likely estimate of the size of the gap between the two sequences is the value $\hat \theta_{\MLE}$ that maximizes the likelihood function, or conveniently, the log likeliehood function, since the log function is a monotonic transformation.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat \theta_{\MLE}
&= \argmax_\theta \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
	= \argmax_\theta \prod_{i=1}^n f_\theta(x_i) \\
&= \argmax_\theta \log \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
	= \argmax_\theta \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_\theta(x_i)
\end{aligned}
$$

Distribution of fragment sizes that span the gap
------------------------------------------------------------

The distribution of observed fragment sizes that span the gap is equal to the population distribution, $P(X=x)$, shifted by the size of the gap, $\theta$. Since we can only observe fragments that actually span the gap, we use Bayes' thereom to determine the conditional probability of observing a fragment of size $x$ given that it spans the gap of size $\theta$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
f_{\theta}(x)
&= P(X=x+\theta \mid \text{fragment spans gap}) \\
&= \frac{ P(\text{fragment spans gap} \mid X=x+\theta) P(X=x+\theta) }
{ P(\text{fragment spans gap}) } \\
&\propto P(\text{fragment spans gap} \mid X=x+\theta) P(X=x+\theta)
\end{aligned}
$$

Assume the reads are sampled uniformly from the genome between the coordinates $a$ and $b$, where $b - a$ is the size of the genome.

$$
P(U=u) = \begin{cases}
\frac{1}{b-a} & a \leq u < b \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

The probability that a fragment of size $X$ spans the gap is the probability that the fragment's left coordinate, $U$, falls to the left of the gap, and its right coordinate, $U+X$, falls to the right of gap.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{Let}\; w_\theta(x + \theta)
&=P(\text{fragment spans gap} \mid X=x+\theta) \\
&=P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge \theta \leq U + X < l_2 + \theta \mid X=x+\theta) \\
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge \theta \leq U + x + \theta < l_2 + \theta) \\
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge 0 \leq U + x < l_2) \\
&= w(x)
\end{aligned}
$$

This shows that $w_\theta(x+\theta)$, the probability that a fragment of size $x+\theta$ spans the gap, is independent of the size of the gap, $\theta$, and depends only on the observed size of the fragment, $x$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
w(x)
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge 0 \leq U + x < l_2) \\
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge -x \leq U < l_2 - x) \\
&= P(\max(-l_1, -x) \leq U < \min(0, l_2 - x)) \\
&= \sum_{i=\max(-l_1, -x)}^{\min(0, l_2 - x) - 1} P(U=i) \\
&= \sum_{i=\max(-l_1, -x)}^{\min(0, l_2 - x) - 1} \frac{1}{b-a} \\
&= \max(0, \min(0, l_2 - x) - \max(-l_1, -x)) \frac{1}{b-a} \\
&\propto \max(0, \min(0, l_2 - x) - \max(-l_1, -x)) \\
&= \max(0, \min(0, l_2 - x) + \min(l_1, x)) \\
&= \max(0, \min(x, l_1, l_2, l_1 + l_2 - x))
\end{aligned}
$$

Without loss of generality, assume $l_1 \leq l_2$.

$$
w(x) \propto \begin{cases}
x & 0 \leq x < l_1 \\
l_1 & l_1 \leq x < l_2 \\
l_1 + l_2 - x & l_2 \leq x < l_1 + l_2 \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
\\
f_\theta(x) \propto f_X(x + \theta) w(x)
\\
f_\theta(x) = \frac{ f_X(x + \theta) w(x) }
	{ \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) }
$$

Solving the maximum likelihood estimator
------------------------------------------------------------

We now substitute the distribution of observed fragment sizes, $f_\theta(x)$, into the formula for the maximum likelihood estimator.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
&= \prod_{i=1}^n f_\theta(x_i) \\
&= \prod_{i=1}^n \frac{ f_X(x_i + \theta) w(i) }
	{ \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) } \\
&= \frac{ \prod_{i=1}^n f_X(x_i + \theta) w(i) }
	{ \left( \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) \right) ^n }
\end{aligned}
\\
\log \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
= \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_X(x_i + \theta)
	+ \sum_{i=1}^n \log w(i)
	- n \log \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j)
\\
\begin{aligned}
\hat \theta_{\MLE}
&= \argmax_\theta \log \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n) \\
&= \argmax_\theta \left[ \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_X(x_i + \theta)
	+ \sum_{i=1}^n \log w(i)
	- n \log \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) \right] \\
&= \argmax_\theta \left[ \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_X(x_i + \theta)
	- n \log \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) \right]
\end{aligned}
$$

Finding the value of $\theta$ that maximizes the likelihood function is an optimization problem. When the range of possible values of $\theta$ is small, that is when the fragment size of the sequencing library is small, it is reasonable to calculate exhaustively every value of $\mathcal{L}(\theta)$ to find the maximum.

Conclusion
================================================================================

This distance estimation algorithm is implemented by the ABySS assembly software [@simpson2009abyss] in the utility DistanceEst, which requires as its input the distribution of fragment sizes of the sequencing library and a SAM file [@li2009sequence] of paired-end reads that map to different sequences.

Acknowledgements
================================================================================

Jared Simpson implemented a maximum likelihood estimator for estimating distances between sequences in the first release of the software ABySS.

References
================================================================================

Commit message:

Use the PeerJ LaTeX template
Set documentclass to wlpeerj

distance-estimator.md, after:

---
title: 'DistanceEstimator: Estimate the distance between two nucleotide sequence fragments using paired-end reads'
author: Shaun D Jackman, Inanc Birol
documentclass: wlpeerj
header-includes:
  \DeclareMathOperator*{\argmax}{arg\,max}
  \DeclareMathOperator{\MLE}{MLE}
  \keywords{genome sequence assembly, scaffolding, maximum likelihood estimator, distance, gap}
  \begin{abstract}
  Paired-end reads may be used to estimate the distance between two sequences. Comparing a statistic, such as the mean, of the sample population of fragment sizes to the global population of fragment sizes is a trivial but flawed estimator. The maximum likelihood estimator yields more accurate estimates.
  \end{abstract}
---

Results
================================================================================

To estimate the distance between two sequences, we start by mapping paired-end reads to the two sequences, which are then ordered and oriented to agree with the orientation of the reads. We establish a coordinate system where $-l_1$ and $-1$ are the first and last base of the first sequence of length $l_1$, and $0$ and $l_2-1$ are the first and last base of the second sequence of length $l_2$.  An observed fragment size, $x_i$, is calculated for each pair by calculating the difference of the mapped position of the first sequenced base of each of the two reads. This observed fragment size differs from the actual fragment size by the size of the gap between the two sequences, $\theta_0$.

The final input is the distribution of fragment sizes of the library, which is derived empirically by mapping the reads to a reference sequence or sequences assembled *de novo* and determining the inferred fragment size distribution.

Estimator using the mean
------------------------------------------------------------

At first glance, this task appears to be rather simple, and a simple solution presents itself readily. A reasonable estimate, $\hat \theta_\text{mean}$, of the size of the gap is the difference between the mean of the population, $\mu$, and the mean of the sample, $\bar x$.

$$
\hat \theta_\text{mean} = \mu - \bar x
$$

Maximum likelihood estimator
------------------------------------------------------------

The estimate of the distance between the two sequences can be improved by using the probability distribution in its entirety rather than a summary statistic. Let the probability of observing a fragment of size $x$ selected at random from the population be $f_X(x)$, and the probability of observing a fragment of size $x$ that spans a gap of size $\theta$ be $f_\theta(x)$. With a sample of $n$ observed fragment sizes, $x_1, \dotsc , x_n$, the likelihood that the two sequences are separated by a distance of $\theta$ bases is $\mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc , x_n)$.

The most likely estimate of the size of the gap between the two sequences is the value $\hat \theta_{\MLE}$ that maximizes the likelihood function, or conveniently, the log likeliehood function, since the log function is a monotonic transformation.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\hat \theta_{\MLE}
&= \argmax_\theta \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
	= \argmax_\theta \prod_{i=1}^n f_\theta(x_i) \\
&= \argmax_\theta \log \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
	= \argmax_\theta \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_\theta(x_i)
\end{aligned}
$$

Distribution of fragment sizes that span the gap
------------------------------------------------------------

The distribution of observed fragment sizes that span the gap is equal to the population distribution, $P(X=x)$, shifted by the size of the gap, $\theta$. Since we can only observe fragments that actually span the gap, we use Bayes' thereom to determine the conditional probability of observing a fragment of size $x$ given that it spans the gap of size $\theta$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
f_{\theta}(x)
&= P(X=x+\theta \mid \text{fragment spans gap}) \\
&= \frac{ P(\text{fragment spans gap} \mid X=x+\theta) P(X=x+\theta) }
{ P(\text{fragment spans gap}) } \\
&\propto P(\text{fragment spans gap} \mid X=x+\theta) P(X=x+\theta)
\end{aligned}
$$

Assume the reads are sampled uniformly from the genome between the coordinates $a$ and $b$, where $b - a$ is the size of the genome.

$$
P(U=u) = \begin{cases}
\frac{1}{b-a} & a \leq u < b \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

The probability that a fragment of size $X$ spans the gap is the probability that the fragment's left coordinate, $U$, falls to the left of the gap, and its right coordinate, $U+X$, falls to the right of gap.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\text{Let}\; w_\theta(x + \theta)
&=P(\text{fragment spans gap} \mid X=x+\theta) \\
&=P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge \theta \leq U + X < l_2 + \theta \mid X=x+\theta) \\
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge \theta \leq U + x + \theta < l_2 + \theta) \\
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge 0 \leq U + x < l_2) \\
&= w(x)
\end{aligned}
$$

This shows that $w_\theta(x+\theta)$, the probability that a fragment of size $x+\theta$ spans the gap, is independent of the size of the gap, $\theta$, and depends only on the observed size of the fragment, $x$.

$$
\begin{aligned}
w(x)
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge 0 \leq U + x < l_2) \\
&= P(-l_1 \leq U < 0 \wedge -x \leq U < l_2 - x) \\
&= P(\max(-l_1, -x) \leq U < \min(0, l_2 - x)) \\
&= \sum_{i=\max(-l_1, -x)}^{\min(0, l_2 - x) - 1} P(U=i) \\
&= \sum_{i=\max(-l_1, -x)}^{\min(0, l_2 - x) - 1} \frac{1}{b-a} \\
&= \max(0, \min(0, l_2 - x) - \max(-l_1, -x)) \frac{1}{b-a} \\
&\propto \max(0, \min(0, l_2 - x) - \max(-l_1, -x)) \\
&= \max(0, \min(0, l_2 - x) + \min(l_1, x)) \\
&= \max(0, \min(x, l_1, l_2, l_1 + l_2 - x))
\end{aligned}
$$

Without loss of generality, assume $l_1 \leq l_2$.

$$
w(x) \propto \begin{cases}
x & 0 \leq x < l_1 \\
l_1 & l_1 \leq x < l_2 \\
l_1 + l_2 - x & l_2 \leq x < l_1 + l_2 \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
\\
f_\theta(x) \propto f_X(x + \theta) w(x)
\\
f_\theta(x) = \frac{ f_X(x + \theta) w(x) }
	{ \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) }
$$

Solving the maximum likelihood estimator
------------------------------------------------------------

We now substitute the distribution of observed fragment sizes, $f_\theta(x)$, into the formula for the maximum likelihood estimator.

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
&= \prod_{i=1}^n f_\theta(x_i) \\
&= \prod_{i=1}^n \frac{ f_X(x_i + \theta) w(i) }
	{ \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) } \\
&= \frac{ \prod_{i=1}^n f_X(x_i + \theta) w(i) }
	{ \left( \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) \right) ^n }
\end{aligned}
\\
\log \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n)
= \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_X(x_i + \theta)
	+ \sum_{i=1}^n \log w(i)
	- n \log \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j)
\\
\begin{aligned}
\hat \theta_{\MLE}
&= \argmax_\theta \log \mathcal{L}(\theta \mid x_1, \dotsc, x_n) \\
&= \argmax_\theta \left[ \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_X(x_i + \theta)
	+ \sum_{i=1}^n \log w(i)
	- n \log \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) \right] \\
&= \argmax_\theta \left[ \sum_{i=1}^n \log f_X(x_i + \theta)
	- n \log \sum_{j=1}^\infty f_X(j + \theta) w(j) \right]
\end{aligned}
$$

Finding the value of $\theta$ that maximizes the likelihood function is an optimization problem. When the range of possible values of $\theta$ is small, that is when the fragment size of the sequencing library is small, it is reasonable to calculate exhaustively every value of $\mathcal{L}(\theta)$ to find the maximum.

Conclusion
================================================================================

This distance estimation algorithm is implemented by the ABySS assembly software [@simpson2009abyss] in the utility DistanceEst, which requires as its input the distribution of fragment sizes of the sequencing library and a SAM file [@li2009sequence] of paired-end reads that map to different sequences.

Acknowledgements
================================================================================

Jared Simpson implemented a maximum likelihood estimator for estimating distances between sequences in the first release of the software ABySS.

References
================================================================================
